3 cities, one newspaper, five headlines

Careless city gifting Covid 3rd life
Delta dominant strain during second wave in Chandigarh
Covid management my only priority for now, says new adviser
Night life almost back, testing drops as well
And...
Farmer storm hits Tricity

Thanks for joining the 60th edition of Monday Review. I’m Amit Arora, with new insights from seven days of reading TOI. 

You need no advanced calculators to solve it but the formula has puzzled many. Today, we look at the new 30:30:40 rule for computing the Class 12 scores and the students' reactions. But the most serious test, perhaps, is for the cops. Their most recent data suggests minors to be behind many cases of online sextortion. Worse, these chiildren aren't even aware that it is a crime.

The Supreme Court's ending the suspense for more than 15 lakh Class 12 students gave them a new mystery to crack. The boards are cancelled and a new evaluation formula framed by the CBSE and the CISCE factors in the scores of classes 10 and 11 and Class 12’s unit, mid-term and pre-board outcomes.

Already being called the Khanwilkar-Maheshwari formula after the judges who never devised it, it promises to deliver the results before July 31. 

If the CBSE has 14 lakh candidates, the CISCE has almost 1 lakh. Best three scores each from Classes and 11, besides marks or grades from the unit tests and term examinations of Class 12 along with practicals would be taken in a graded weightage — 30% each for Classes 10 and 11, and 40% for Class 12.

Schools have the freedom to decide whether to take all Class 12 assessments or just pre-boards into account, or a combination. The CISCE will judge students on how they scored in the past six year. If you were not good in Class 6, bad news for you.

Each school will have a five-member result committee of principal, two postgraduate teachers from same school, and 2 PGTs from neighbouring schools.

When the situation improves, the CBSE students will have the option of sitting the examinations. The boards explained that Clsss-12 results alone may not reveal the potential of the students who take the online tests in an unfamiliar setting. A few students from Class XII reviewed the formula and shared their views with The Times of India.

[ 4 Videos ]

Thanks, students. The entire mechanism appears to favour consistent performers rather than those who display a surprise sparkle in the board examinations. However, there will be some way out for the students who changed boards and had no time to adjust.

Moving on...
Sextortion, the practice of extorting money or sexual favours by threatening to reveal proof of someone's sexual activity, a growing case of targeting teens, by the teens. Their most favourite toy, the mobile phone, is like a dagger in their hands. Only it cuts deeper.

In 80% of the cases of indecent videos and pictures reported by women, their acquaintances are the accused. The cybercrime cell has found out that this material was shared during the period of friendship, and in only 20% cases the faces were morphed.

Friends, boyfriends, fiancés, or husbands use pictures shared before the breakup to blackmail women. Police said and now even social-media-junkie minors were into creating fake Facebook profiles and sexting. They recall a boy who duplicated an email ID to make a dirty fake Instagram page of a girl, using the images she had shared with him in good faith.

Police have found that the youngsters aren’t even aware that duplicating an email ID or social media account was a crime. They create these for fun or to harass the peers without realising they could be in serious trouble.

See you next Monday, viewers. For your TOI copy, call us at this number: 1800 121 0005. Please, like, share, and subscribe, and get vaccinated.