Script:-

Rajinder:-
Headlines

3 cities, one newspaper, five headlines

Covid daily growth rate dips

Entries made, patients not admitted

Private hospital booked for cheating Covid patients

Markets open but rules tossed out

PPE kits leading to complaints

Thanks for joining the 56th edition of Monday Review. I’m Rajinder S Nagarkoti, with new reflections from seven days of reading TOI. Today we review self-test kits and listen to the man who saw tomorrow.

India’s first self-test kits for Covid-19 are out.

Why wait in suspense when you can self-test Covid at home. DRDO’s Dipcovan kit will be available from next month for Rs 75 and takes 75 minutes. Pune-made Coviself costs Rs 250 but takes just 15 minutes. Check out how it works.

The user manual is simple, really.

First, load the app.

Take the prefilled extraction tube and tap it gently 3 or 4 times so that the liquid settles at the bottom.

Unscrew the cap and hold the tube in your hand.

Tear the swab pack from the tail end. Be careful not to touch the swab side.

Insert the sterile nasal swab in both nostrils 2 to 4 cm or until the resistance is met

Roll the swab five times inside

Dip the swab in the
pre-filled tube, pinch tube at the bottom, swirl the swab, break the stick that remains out, and close the cap

On the test card, put two drops in the well, one after the other, by pressing the tube and wait 15 minutes for the result

If the bar shows up only at the control section 'C', the result is negative, takes 15 minutes to show

If the bar appears at both 'C' and test section 'T', the test is positive, and shows in 5 to 7 minutes

Any result taking more than 20 minutes to appear is invalid

To fetch your report, scan the QR code on the card using the app, open the link, take a printout

Many countries such as the UK use similar tests. Hopefully, this will improve the testing rate.

[ Pause ]

Now the man who predicted outbreak 3 years before.

The retreating Covid-19 tsunami has left India the Mucormycosis epidemic in its floating debris. From 50-60 a year, cases increased suddenly to more than 11,000. TOI's Shimona Kanwar got hold of Chandigarh microbiologist Jagdish Chander, who foresaw the destruction in 2018. Over to my colleague, Aditya Rishi, for the details.

Aditya:-

Thanks, Rajinder. Here’s a gist of what the doctor told TOI:- 

Mucor is your common bread mould fungus, now found in diabetics and steroid-recipient post-Covid patients that have something wrong with their white blood cells. 

Three years ago, the doctor predicted an exponential rise of this infection that’ll attack even the healthiest.

Its spores enter the body from the skin cuts, blood stream, or urinary tract. Diabetes is the underlying cause in 80% of the Indian cases, while in the West, it is malignancy such as leukaemia.

The virus flared up during Covid-19 because the second-week drug was given during the first. The doses are discrepant, very high, and prolonged. This enhances the blood sugar and triggers an outbreak of Mucor.
In 90-to-95% cases, Rhizopus arrhizus species of fungus is behind the outbreak and its mortality rate is about 50%.

Its prime sign is a blackened dead tissue at the affected site where the fungus-invaded blood has clotted. Mucor can be diagnosed within 10 minutes with a cost-effective microscope. The problem is most people look for automated tests.

The treatment
To save life, surgery is a must within two hours of arrival, and before the operation, we must control the sugar levels. Late diagnosis affects the eyes and the brain. Amphotericin B is the mainstay drug, but for want of it, doctors have to use costlier and ineffective alternatives.

Rajinder:- 

Thanks, Aditya.
See you next Monday, viewers, when we’ll talk of a Covid plan that’s ready since 1946. For your TOI copy, call us at this number: 1800 121 0005. Please, like, share, and subscribe, and get vaccinated